# Community And Ecosystem

**KEY RECOMMENDATION**: Communities and ecosystems around open source
projects are not all the same. Project archetypes describe these
differences and can help you understand a project's dynamics, health,
and sustainability. This is useful when assessing an open source
project for adoption or in creating your own open source
project. These insights can help you set expections and plan
investments.

EXAMPLE: The City of Paris' [Lutece](https://lutece.paris.fr/lutece/),
an open source platform for municipal digital services, largely aligns
with the Controlled Ecosystem archetype, in which a 'benevolent
dictator' (here, the City of Paris) manages the core platform that
supports over [400 customized plugins created by cities and
organizations accross the
globe](https://lutece.paris.fr/lutece/community.html). A team
considering adopting Lutece and working with a vendor to create
several specific extensions wouldn't worry if the vendor hasn't
contributed to the main platform but would look for contribution to
several existing extensions as a sign of experience and competence.

**KEY RECOMMENDATION** Diversity among participants making the most
resource investments in an open source project indicates stability,
resilience and growth potential for most project archetypes. Look for
diversity in areas like employers of contributors or of vendors
providing support services, such as customization, deployment
assistance, maintenance and operations, and training.

EXAMPLE: [55 commerical businesses](https://mifos.org/directory)
provide a broad array of supporting services around the financial
inclusion DPG [Mifos](https://mifos.org/), from custom development and
hosting to business consulting and deployment support.

(TODO: MIFOS has a lot of partners but I don't see a lot of this
showing up in the public repo. I quickly looked at dev forum mailing
list and it seems pretty diverse, so I think the above is fair enough
to say. Not sure if an example comes to someone else's mind? Mifos web
site also says they have a marketplace/app store but I couldn't find a
link or other reference online...)

**KEY RECOMMENDATION**: Encouraging commercial participation can be
useful to a DPG's adoption and sustainability, but take care to foster
diverse commercial actors and be wary of creating commerical
opportunities that could permit unfair advantage.

EXAMPLE: The DPG [Mojaloop](https://mojaloop.io/) publishes a
[list](https://mojaloop.io/mojaloop-business-directory) of
consultants, systems integrators, training organizations, business
operations supporters and other solution providers, vetted against a
published list of criteria. They also [host open training, networking,
and business development events](https://mojaloop.io/category/events/)
to connect these commerical participants to new business
opportunities.

**KEY RECOMMENDATION**: Financial sustainability can look different across a project's
stages. The types and sources of available funding options might change as a project
progresses.

EXAMPLE: Your agency might be able to cover seed funding, as was the
case with the World Bank's Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery (GFDDR) with the [GeoNode
project](https://geonode.org/). Philanthropic funds might help you
pilot the project in particular locations, as was the case with the
[DHIS2](https://dhis2.org/), or to scale, as was the case with
[OpenSRP](https://wiki.digitalsquare.io/index.php/Digital_Square_Investments_in_Global_Goods#Notice_B_Investments). Charging
for use might cover ongoing maintenance costs. For example, the DPG
[ODK](https://getodk.org/) is free as a self-hosted solution for
offline data collection, but the organization also provides
[cloud-based hosting at different pricing
tiers](https://getodk.org/#odk-cloud).

Understanding how to work with, participate in, and foster a
successful open source project is not just a matter of understanding
the software at a technical level; it also requires understanding the
motivations and interrelationships of the people and organizations who
do make up the project.  While we touch upon some aspects of finding
or nurturing a broader DPG supportive ecosystem at the national level
in the [Introduction](introduction.md#introduction), this module provides guidance on
understanding project-level communities and ecosystems.  The
[Adoptability module](adoptability.md#adoptability-assessment) provides even more detailed
recommendations for putting this understanding into evaluating open
source projects, including how to map a project's ecosystem.

DPG efforts run on the collective motivations of all of their
participants.  A healthy project often gathers around itself a diverse
ecosystem in which many participants cooperate, each for their own
reasons.  Those reasons need not be the same.  They might even be in
tension or in outright competition with each other.  Open source
processes excel at enabling many parties with divergent interests to
cooperate and create shared value.

We can refer to the direct participants in an open project as the
project's community.  In addition to that close community of
cooperating participants, we find that successful projects gather a
larger ecosystem around them.  This ecosystem is centered on the
community, and also includes related open source efforts, users,
integrators, clients, competitors, and stakeholders.  Anybody who has
an interest in the project's output and operations is part of the
ecosystem.

Communities can contain governmental, commercial, or volunteer
contributors, though the lines between these categories often blur.
"Volunteer" contributors who aren't being paid directly for their work
in a project often have a business interest in the output of the
project.  Similarly, commercial vendors might be participating as part
of a government contract.  Roles are fluid, and strictly labelling
community participants can at times be reductionist.

What everybody in the community has in common is that they gain an
advantage to pooling their resources: there's no reason for any one
agency or firm to shoulder the entire burden of fixing bugs or
developing new features when they all need the same bugs fixed and,
for the most part, the same features developed.  This common interest,
built around a zone of cooperation, is the core of a project's
community.

Wider ecosystems can also contain a diversity of participants from
many different sectors.  Even though most participants in the extended
ecosystem of stakeholders do not directly contribute to a project,
they help the project realize its value in the world. These
stakeholders can include investors, NGOs, funders, end users, and even
competing and adjacent efforts. They magnify the value of the
investments made by direct participants.  And of course, the best
place to recruit new community contributors is from that wider
ecosystem.

The import of all this value, investment, and mutual reliance is that
successful DPG communities are usually built on mutual or collective benefit.
Although it is certainly accurate to refer to this collective as a
"community" -- it has social relations, cultural norms, status
differentiation, informal debt relations, and all the other aspects of
human communities -- it is not a community that runs on altruism.
Even mission-driven participation is best understood as value-seeking
(but not value-capturing) in open communities.  


## Project Archetypes

One of the most important skills for agencies exploring open source is
understanding existing ecosystems and their project's place within
them.  In order to plan a project that builds on or collaborates with
other open source efforts, agencies must know their own projects and
also know what to expect from other community participants. Again, the
Adoptability module (TBD LINK) describes how to map a project's
ecosystem.

Open source projects operate in many different ways.  Experienced open
source practitioners build nuanced open source strategies by
pattern-matching against other open source projects.  They use those
patterns to understand their own projects and also the other open
source efforts around them.  This understanding guides how they
approach adopting an open source product, who they will recruit as new
contributors to an existing project -- basically, this understanding
guides their expectations, decisions and investments.  Practitioners
with a lot of experience have seen many different types of projects
succeed and fail in all kinds of situations.  Less experienced
practitioners pattern match against a smaller set, which is to say
they might have only one or a small handful of open source approaches
and find it difficult to perform nuanced analysis.

Mozilla identified this experience gap as a general problem in open
source, and developed a set of open source project archetypes to give
practitioners more patterns to match against.  A note of caution: a
given project won't necessarily fit perfectly into one of these
archetypes, and a project might not reflect the same archetype(s) for
its entire history -- transitions happen all the time.  In some
projects, one sees multiple archetypes at work or even different sets
of participants pushing the project toward separate archetypal
practices.

Still, the purpose of the archetypes is to lead people away from generic open
source thinking and toward considering in more detail the behaviors
and dynamics their open source investment seeks to create.  Each
archetype tends toward typical strategies, and categorizing projects
by archetype can help in predicting behavior.  Similarly, where the
strategies deviate, we can usually find deviation from the archetype
too.  The more specific you are about what you want from open source
in your particular context, the more you will be able to look for
patterns and practices in successful open source projects that operate
in similar contexts.  
 
For example, in evaluating an existing open source project, you
wouldn't expect a "rocket ship" project to invest in supporting new
contributors, and you'd want to plan any contribution and
participation accordingly, with personnel with some level of open
source familiarity.  Simlarly, if you're planning to create your own
multi-vendor infrastructure project, you'd want to invest in good API
documentation early on.

A complete discussion of each archetype is available in Mozilla's
report.  Below are just their names and brief descriptions, from which
one might draw some ideas of pattern each one represents.  (The [full
report is here](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes), and there
is also a [quick-reference
chart](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2-quick-ref.pdf)
available).

* [Wide Open](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.13)

  The project intends large-scale collaboration and is willing to slow
  down certain aspects of development in order to scale up the number
  of contributors, increase the diversity of contribution sources, and
  take more points of view into account.  An example would be the
  [Apache HTTP Server project](https://httpd.apache.org/).  The DPG
  [Apache Fineract](https://fineract.apache.org), which provides core
  financial services functionality for the world's 2 billion
  underbanked and unbanked, might also fit here, or it could be viewed
  more as a controlled ecosystem (see below).  Again, exact
  categorization isn't as important how the exercise gets you thinking
  about a project's likely dynamics and ecosystem and what this might
  mean for your efforts.

* [Rocket Ship to Mars](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.10)

  The project is driven by a small, tightly-focused core team that
  knows exactly where it's going.  If you want to go there too, you
  can get on board the rocket ship, but right now the project is not
  looking for (and will not stop for) discussions about alternative
  roadmaps, unplanned features, or unsolicited goals.  This archetype
  is often found in funded projects that are in their early stages.
  An example might be the [Signal messaging
  application](https://signal.org/en/), along with the DPG
  [AIAgro](https://rentadrone.cl/developers/ai-agro/).

* [B2B Open Source](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.8)

  The project is sponsored and largely driven by a commercial
  organization, and is aimed at users who are also commercial
  organizations.  The sponsoring organization may have a direct revnue
  interest in a product based on the project, or may have a strategic
  interest (for example, undermining a competitor's product).
  Google's [Android operating system](https://source.android.com/) is
  a great example here.

* [Specialty Library](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.15)

  The project's goal is to provide a high-quality solution to a narrow
  and specific problem.  Meaningful participation requires familiarity
  and expertise with that problem and with the project's solution.
  The [libmp4](https://sourceforge.net/projects/libmp4/) software
  library to handle MP4 files is an example.

* [Multi-Vendor Infrastructure](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.9)

  When a number of commercial organizations share a common need, it
  makes sense for them to pool their resources into one open source
  project that meets that need, rather than each one developing their
  own separate but duplicative solution.  For
  example:[Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/), an open-source system
  for automating deployment, scaling, and management of containerized
  applications. [X-Road's distributed data
  exchange](https://x-road.global/x-road-technology-overview) is a DPG
  example here as well.

  (See [Spot The Pattern:
  Commoditization](https://blog.opentechstrategies.com/2019/10/commoditization/).)

* [Mass Market](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.14)

  An open source project aimed at very broad user adoption.  Mass
  Market projects often have commercial sponsorship of some kind, and
  if they are successful they tend to have fairly elaborate mechanisms
  to help steer potential contributors to the right place -- because
  even a tiny fraction of the user base trying to file bug reports or
  send in improvements can be overwhelming if you have millions of
  users.  The [LibreOffice](https://www.libreoffice.org/) open source
  office suite is an example here, as is [Mozilla's Firefox
  browser](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/).

* [Upstream Dependency](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.17)

  A project that serves as a dependency to a wide variety of other
  projects.  Many of the common web-development Javascript libraries
  fit well into this archetype, for example.  Their governance tends
  to be somewhat informal, perhaps because the variety of projects
  that depend on them serves as its own kind of constraint on
  decision-making, thus reducing the need for highly structured
  governance. 

* [Trusted Vendor](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.16)

  A commercial organization with unique expertise may sometimes
  maintain an open source project that simultaneously serves to
  advertise that expertise, to maintain it, and to provide leads on
  direct or indirect sources of revenue.  Interaction with these
  projects is sometimes equivalent to interaction with that particular
  vendor.  The [Coral web site commenting and community building
  platform](https://coralproject.net/) is such an example, with Vox
  Media supporting the open source project and making money through
  hosting, training and implementation help.  The [Osano open source
  cookie/consent management
  platform](https://github.com/osano/cookieconsent) could be
  categorized here. It's open to contribution but largely maintained
  by the parent B-corp company Osano, which also offers a paid hosted
  version.

* [Controlled Ecosystem](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.12)

  This is most often seen with highly extensible software: a dominant
  company maintains the core project (and a corresponding product from
  which they non-exclusively derive revenue), surrounded by a
  satellite community of extension providers.  Interaction with the
  core project can be very different from interaction with that
  extension ecosystem.  Although the core development is usually
  dominated by the founding company, the extensions market place has
  often served as an incubator for other vendors who provide support,
  so the presence of the dominant player does not usually imply a
  monopoly on support availability. 
  
  The open source [WordPress web site builder](https://wordpress.com/)
  is an example, where WordPress invests the most in developing the
  core platform but supports a range of indepdendent extension
  developers and professional services.  The City of Paris'
  [Lutece](https://lutece.paris.fr/lutece/), an open source platform
  for municipal digital services, is a controlled ecosystem project
  that supports over 400 plugins created by cities and organizations
  accross the globe.  Estonia's DPG X-Road (now managed by the Nordic
  Institute for Interoperability Solutions (NIIS)) fits here, with its
  [support for
  extensions](https://x-road.global/xroad-technology-partners-companies),
  as does the DPG [Primero](https://www.primero.org).
  
  The multi-faceted DPG Mifos is an interesting example of how a
  modular technical architecture (see Procurement)(TBD LINK) can lend
  itself to having individual components run as quite different
  projects.  It's also a good example of a thoughtfully phased
  approach to DPG development that's taken advantage of the existing
  global open source ecosystem.  Fineract's back-end core banking
  functionality and open APIs were originally developed by the
  non-profit [Mifos](https://mifos.org) (Micro Finance Open Source)
  Initiative to encourage the growth of microfinance institutions.
  Once the open source core platform was stable, Mifos transferred the
  code to the Apache Software Foundation, a non-profit organization
  that hosts and fosters open source products (as noted above, the
  Apache HTTP server is probably its most well known product).  This
  cooperative division of labor let Apache Fineract develop on its own
  path - hosted by Apache, which has a track record of building
  sustainable community development of enterprise-grade products --
  while Mifos could turn its attention to more market-focused
  activities to reach the scale needed for global adoption.  To do
  this, it created its own product built on top of Apache Fineract,
  called [Mifos
  X](https://mifos.org/mifos-x/flexible-product-configuration/),
  that's a complete 'off-the-shelf' solution, combining a web app
  (Mifos X Web App, formerly the Mifos Community App), a mobile app
  for field officers (Mifos Android), a mobile app for clients (Mifos
  Mobile), Pentaho-based reports and a data import tool.  Each of the
  Mifos extensions are also [open source
  DPGs](https://digitalpublicgoods.net/registry/).  In this way, Mifos
  X is more of a controlled ecosystem, with extensions and
  customization around a core platform.

  See Commercial Participants (TBD LINK) below for more insight into
  how Mifos's extensibility helps them engage commercial partners to
  expand their market and reach. Assessing software extensibility is
  also covered in the Adoptability module (TBD LINK).

* [Single Maintainer Houseplant](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.11)

  A single person started the project, has maintained it all along,
  and either has not wanted to or has not been able to expand its
  developer base. (While this kind of open source project definitely
  exists, it is perhaps overrepresented in writings and public
  discussion about open source.)

* [Bathwater](https://opentechstrategies.com/archetypes-files/open-source-archetypes-v2.pdf#section*.18)

  A project whose source code has been published under an open source
  license, but which is now being ignored by its original authors.
  The code was thrown over the wall, as the saying goes, and it is
  there for anyone else to pick up if they want.


### Identifying Archetypes In Your Community

The most common archetype we observe in the wild is the "Wide Open"
project.  This is normally what people think of when they imagine an
open source project.  Wide Open projects take all comers and try to
gather as much dev momentum as they can.  They skew toward shared
governance models and cultivate a welcoming, inclusive air.  This
approach is popular for a reason -- it's a pretty good default
starting point for a lot of projects, especially government-led open
source.

But not all projects fit that mold.  Sometimes you want to build an
open source ecosystem and absolutely must retain a strong, controlling
position to achieve the policy goals that drive your open source work.
In industry, we see that, for example, with Google's Android work.
There, one company makes the majority of the investment, and benefits
by steering the majority of the mobile market to its products,
services, and advertising network.

In Android's case, the additive value of individual additional
contributors to the ecosystem is fairly low.  It's not worth giving up
control to gain those contributions.  A Wide Open approach doesn't fit
Google's strategic need.  Instead, one can classify that project as
B2B Open Source, which is a much less inviting model.

In government, we see this type of cautious approach around crucial
infrastructure.  Election infrastructure projects, for example, has a
very high bar for participation and is only useful to government
agencies and the vendors who serve them.  Such projects might try to
be Wide Open, but will in practice tend toward a blend of the
characteristics of multivendor infrastructure and specialty library.

Archetypes help us identify that Android is not like a stereotypical
open source project.  They help us predict the dynamics around open
source election infrastructure. They allow us to see a project's
actual behavior rather than the expected or stereotypical behavior.
We can use archetypes to reveal something about a project's strategy
and helps us form credible expectations about how the project will
behave in the future.  It would be disastrous, for example, to build a
product strategy that depends on being able to have any influence on
Android's road map or feature set.  Anybody who misidentifies Google's
strategy on that point (and there have been a few) is defeated before
they write a single line of code.

Although government agencies can expect to find the full range of
archetypes among the projects it encounters, its own projects will
tend to fall into just a few categories.  Many government projects
lean toward "Wide Open" dynamics, and that archetype is a good default
starting point for consideration.  Less often one finds "Controlled
Ecosystem," "Multi-Vendor Infrastructure," and "Trusted Vendor"
archetypes.  All of these are candidates for projects lead by or
originating in government agencies, depending on strategic and policy
needs.

There are other cases where archetypes help us understand the open
source world around us.  In each case, the archetypes are a rough lens
that leads us to clarify our view of a product's position.  The
archetypes, though, are just a starting point.  They are a shared
vocabulary for a conversation that should eventually move beyond
archetypal thinking.  After all, a project's success will come in
details much finer than a few archetypes could possibly capture.

It is always important to remember that ultimately each archetype is a
simplification.  Every successful project grows because it is
well-fitted to the particular needs of its contributors and users.  If
you view the archetypes as a set of slightly-more-specific generic
game plans, you lose most of their value.  They are a starting point
for consideration.  As a project grows and adapts to its niche, its
strategy and planning can and should move to a uniquely detailed view
of its needs.  Archetypes are a useful start to analysis, but the
conversation should never end there.

**KEY RECOMMENDATION**: Communities and ecosystems around open source
projects are not all the same. Their differences matter in setting
correct expectations around likely project dynamics, health, and
sustainability. 

With an ecosystem map as background, consider what
project archetype might roughly fit the open source project you're
evaluating or that you plan to launch. Although these maps are inexact
approximations that change over time, this is a key level-setting
exercise for your team when assessing an open source project or
planning to create your own, and it should be periodically revisited.

(TBD: There is more to say here of course, but this section is getting
long, so let's leave off for the moment and not go deeper than we
need.  Note: Victor
[suggests](https://github.com/unicef/publicgoods-toolkit/pull/12#discussion_r651325121)
including a mapping/analysis of some existing DPGs to the archetypes.
We can add that analysis after doing some interviews.)

(TBD: from Susy: some DPG examples added above.)

## Community Diversity

(TODO: UNICEF wants "Justin" to review this section on health and
diversity?  (Followup note: Karl suspects that's a transcription error
and that it's actually Jameson.))

There are many ways to think about the diversity of an open source
project community.  Do its contributors come from a wide variety of
geographic or cultural origins?  Do they represent a wide variety of
skill levels?  Do they represent a wide variety of usage patterns?  Do
they represent a variety of organizations and organizational needs?
Does the project have diverse paths by which someone can contribute
(e.g., coding, testing, documentation, bug ticket management, etc)?

Any of these dimensions of diversity may be relevant for adoption of a
DPG, and its useful to think about what dimensions matter as you
create your ecosystem map.  However, we especially urge consideration
of diversity of investment -- i.e., employer diversity among the
various contributors, and diversity among vendors offering support
services -- simply because these aspects of diversity are so often
overlooked, and yet are so important to the health and success of a
DPG.  This diversity is particularly important to projects that aren't
speciality software libraries, although even there overreliance on one
contributor type can be problematic.  Note that it can take some
sleuthing to figure out the backgrounds of contributors, who often use
a non-work related identifier or even pseudonyms.

In considering diversity, including diversity of investment sources,
it is useful to recall that participants tend to exercise control over
a project in rough proportion to investment and to a lesser degree to
reliance and benefit.  Diversifying contributions will usually
diversify the voices that dictate a project's direction.

Conversely, projects that over-rely on one provider of resources often
find themselves at risk of over-fitting their products to the needs of
that resource-dominant participant.  This tends to depress
contribution, which further concentrates investment.  As projects
retreat from open collaboration, they become more vulnerable to their
one, dominant participant leaving the project or shifting direction.

This tendency for non-diversified projects to further centralize is
often a risk for early-stage DPG projects. At the start of most
projects, communities are not usually diverse.  They haven't attracted
enough participants to have diversity.  Projects in this situation
often find they have to invest in outreach and make special efforts to
attract new participants.

**FURTHER READING** The World Bank's [Open Data for Resilience
Initiative + GeoNode: A Case Study on Institutional Investments in
Open
Source](https://opendri.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/OpenDRI-and-GeoNode-a-Case-Study-on-Institutional-Investments-in-Open-Source.pdf) presents
how the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)
invested in a diversified set of partners, in part by using modular
contracting (see also Procurement), ultimately creating a successfully
self-sustaining open source project.

**KEY RECOMMENDATION** Diversity among those making the most resource
investments in an open source project indicates stability, resilience
and growth potential for most project archetypes. Look for diversity
in areas like employers of contributors or of vendors providing
support services, such as customization, deployment assistance,
maintenance and operations, and training.
 
## Community Health

The technology industry has been wrangling with how best to measure
and understand open source community health metrics for some time.
There are frameworks that consider health from a business ecosytem
perspective, like the [Open Source Ecosystem Health Operationalization
(OSEHO)
framework](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261715766_Measuring_the_Health_of_Open_Source_Software_Ecosystems_Beyond_the_Scope_of_Project_Health),
and standardized activity measurements created by the Linux
Foundation's [Community Health Analytics Open Source Software
(CHAOSS)](https://chaoss.community/) working group.  Such activity
metrics are useful but can be insufficient to determining health
without a deeper knowledge of the project's goals and type.  For
example, pull request efficiency might not be as important to a
multi-vendor infrastructure type project as the rate at which partner
contributors pick up high priority issues.

In the big picture, an open source community's health and
sustainability ultimately depends on the presence of a user base that
needs the DPG and is willing, directly or indirectly, to invest in it.
New contributors come from either those users or from the
organizations that service those users; useful feature direction for
the project's roadmap comes likewise from those users or their
representatives; and bug reports -- the lifeblood of an active open
source project -- come ultimately from those users.

Some of these details can be gleaned from an open source project's
code repository.  Unfortunately, the tools for analyzing metrics are
complicated for decision makers without some technical know-how.  The
CHAOSS working group does provide open source software for running
analytics on GitHub and GitLab, which are among most popular
repository management services, as well as on issue tracking systems,
but again, these take some know-how to use.

(TBD: SUSY NOTE: It looks like CHAOSS will also run analytics for
requesters, but I don't think this is a very good/tried program and
don't think we should recommend, but I wanted to point this out.
UNICEF might want to mention plans for their own service.)

Still, even a novice can gain some useful insights by looking at
activity over time in the bug tracker and the record of change, and
this is often a fine enough way to roughly assess the health of a
project community (and a note here that 'bugs' as referenced here are
also known as 'issues').

* What is the rate of ticket filings and the approximate number of
  unique filers?  These two factors together are a proxy for the size
  and level of the user base.

* How often do project developers respond in bug tickets?  How well do
  they respond: are they constructive, both with users and with other
  developers in the discussion?  Do the responses result in changes to
  the product itself?

* Is it always the same developer, or small set of developers
  responding?  Or is responsiveness well-distributed throughout the
  development team?  Is there the diversity of developers and
  commercial participants you'd expect for the project type?

The rate at which bug reports are closed is actually not very
important.  In a healthy project with an active user base, bug reports
are sometimes filed faster than the development team can close them.
The important question is not rate of resolution, but how the project
responds to and organizes the influx of reports. 

A healthy project also has development spread across multiple
developers.  Exactly how many depends on the size of the project; it's
not uncommon for a project to have a few very active developers doing
most of the work, and then a "long tail" of other developers doing the
rest.  But the gentleness of that curve, from the most active
developers to the least, tends to correlate with project health.

Moving up to a higher level of consideration, a project community
tends to be healthier and more sustainable the greater the number and
variety of its commercial participants.  Depending on the project
archetype, a lack of commercial participants isn't necessarily a sign
of a languishing community, but the presence of engaged commercial
participants does confirm that a project is creating value. There's
the added concern of project overreliance on individual unpaid
volunteers, who suffer high burnout rates.  Of course, commercial
participation can bring its own issues as noted below, including the
potential to being prone to changing priorities more quickly than
non-commercial participants.  In fact, at least one open source
stewardship organization has a rule that it will only accept projects
as members if there is a sufficient diversity of employers across the
project's individual maintainers.  Their logic is that if most of the
developers in the project are employed by a single company and that
company changes priorities, the project will be in immediate danger of
folding.

Again, it is difficult to offer absolute numbers or base metrics that
indicate whether a project is "healthy" or not.  All the data gleaned
from a project's bug tracker must be considered in the wider context
of the rest of the project.  Project metrics, especially as they
change over time, are strong signals that add to the understanding of
a project.  They are not, however, very informative on their own.

There are two other relatively obvious tasks that should complement
the quick glance at a project's bug tracker that we describe above.
First, a little web surfing can take you to valuable project
discussion forums, news release (see also the Adoptability module)
(TBD LINK) and other public information and can also help you evaluate
if the project has the level of community 'scaffolding'
(documentation, clear governance processes, security vulnerability
reporting) that you'd expect for such a project type and its maturity.
Second, actually speaking to a variety of people involved in the
project almost always leads to valuable insights.

**RECOMMENDATION**: To roughly assess the health of an open source
project, look at the bug tracker to understand the activity 'vibrancy'
around the project.  The bug tracker, along with other web resources
like user forums, should also give you some insight into the diversity
of developers and commercial participants. Diversity, the growth rate
of adoption, and a well structured ability to respond to input are
good markers of health and sustainability. The level of quality
community 'scaffolding' around a project, such as documentation,
should also fit what you'd expect for that project's type. And lastly,
talking to a sample of diverse participants will also give you as
sense for how the community is doing.

Community health, as outlined above, matters to DPGs because community
health is the key to sustainability.  Those who are investing in those
DPGs should consider every action they take from a community health
perspective.  For example, when choosing between vendors, if one of
those vendors is already highly dominant in the project community, it
could be advantageous (from the project's perspective) for you to
choose a different vendor -- assuming that vendor can competently
provide the needed services -- in order to help equalize the balance
of power between commercial actors in the project.  Of course,
procurement rules might require choosing the lowest bidder or include
other decisive factors that run counter to community health
considerations, but we're describing an ideal state here.

Note that many aspects of open source project community health are
also discussed, implicitly and sometimes explicitly, in the
Adoptability module (TBD LINK).


## Non-Commercial Participants

Depending on the open source project, there may be fewer or more
non-commercial participants than commercial ones; it varies from
project to project.

A "non-commercial" participant, in this context, can mean one of two
things:

1) An organizational participant that is ultimately motivated by
   something other than profit.

2) An individual developer who contributes to the project but is not
   directly paid for that work.

Organizational non-commercial participants are usually NGOs
(non-profit organizations) or government agencies.  They are often
motivated by equity concerns -- making sure the product is available
and usable in contexts where it might not otherwise be -- or a desire
to avoid having public data or public goods monopolized in a
proprietary system (with the attendant risks of vendor lock-in, as
described in Adoptability: Data Portability and Avoiding Vendor
Lock-In)(TBD LINK)

Such participants often act in the project through vendors, and the
vendors of course have a commercial interest as well.  In these cases,
there can occasionally be conflicts between the two parties'
motivations.  For example, the NGO client may want an API capability
that the vendor is reluctant to add because the presence of that
capability in the open source product would reduce the value of some
proprietary offering of the vendor's.

There is no general formula for avoiding nor for resolving such
conflicts.  However, those selecting and deploying DPGs should be
aware of the potential for those kinds of conflicts to arise.  Mere
awareness of the possibility may be enough to aid negotations and
motivate early contract clarity.

Individual contributors who are not directly paid for their work are
more often called "volunteers", but it is also reasonable to call them
non-commercial participants.  A volunteer's motivations may be
connected to their current job or business interests, but if they are
ultimately participating as an individual contributor and their
participation is likely to persist across changes of employment, then
they have a bond with the project that goes beyond their day job and
their motivation can be said to be non-commercial.  Every individual
in the project usually has at least some non-commercial element to
their participation.  Even developers who work on the project
full-time as their salaried job generally retain their community
status in the project if they move from employer to employer.

It is worth noting that some DPG communities might confine themselves
to non-commercial participants.  Most DPG licenses allow commercial as
a well as non-commercial use, but not all.  While it is rarely useful
for governments to create communities with such restrictions, agencies
might encounter non-commercial communities in the course of their
work.

The most frequent form of non-commercial DPG are creative works
publised under a Creative Commons license "NC" license.  The "NC"
stands for "non-commercial".  Not all Creative Commons work is
restricted to non-commercial use, so agencies should be sure to look
at *which* Creative Commons license applies to materials they use.

In the case of open source software all commonly used licenses allow
commerical use, as noted in the Introduction (TBD LINK).  In fact,
most community participants would classify software whose license
disallows commercial use as "not open source".  The Open Source
Initiative offers what many community participants agree is an
authoritative definition of "open source".  That definition excludes
software that discriminates against commercial use.  All commonly-used
open source licenses and most projects align on this point.

At the same time, some open source community members are offering
"Ethical Source" licenses.  These licenses restrict the use of DPGs
when their use might contravene various social values.  Regardless of
whether or not we call these licenses "open source", people working on
DPGs in a government context might well come across DPGs that use
these licenses.

In considering commercial vs non-commercial communities, agencies
should keep in mind that most jurisdictions have defined "commercial"
in a clear way as it applies to open licensing.  While governmental
use would seem to be quite clearly non-commercial, in some
jurisdictions, it might be less clear when vendors work on DPGs on
behalf of government clients.  This is something to clarify early in
evaluating an open source project.


## Commercial Participants

All open source software licenses, by the most common definition,
allow commercial as well as non-commercial use of the software, and it
is typical for open source projects to have both commercial and
non-commercial participants.  Some individuals may even represent both
types at different times.

Successful commercial participants tend to take a fairly long-term
view of their participation.  They are in the project because it
enables them to provide some product or service, and that means that
their future (for that product or service) is tied to the project --
which means that future is tied to the community, which means that
their credibility with and relationships to others in the community
have an economic value that goes beyond one day's bugfix or another
day's feature request.

This economic value is understood as such quite literally by those
participants.  For example, when a company that is very active in an
important open source project is the willing target of an acquisition,
it works with the acquirer to place a monetary value -- a definite
number -- on its relationship to and influence in that project.  That
number is partly computed by looking at the individual employees at
the target company who are active in the project, determining numbers
for *their* participation in the project, and estimating their chances
of staying on board after the acquisition.

Interestingly, this does not mean that those employees, who are
members of the project community, are viewed with suspicion by other
members.  Everyone understands that each person is there for a reason,
and commercial reasons are not thought of as better or worse than any
other reason.  As long as people act with care for the project's
long-term interest, and their quality of work is high, their
motivations might be useful context but are largely their own
business. 

Some DPG projects go even a step further.  As a way to spur further
investment by commercial participants, they undertake to create
commercial opportunities for participants.  For example, the [DPG
Mojaloop publishes a list of consultants, systems integrators,
training organizations, business operations supporters and other
solution providers](https://mojaloop.io/mojaloop-business-directory),
vetted against a published list of criteria. They also [host open
training, networking, and business development
events](https://mojaloop.io/category/events/) to connect these
commerical participants to new business opportunities.  Sometimes these 
opportunities tend to reward more active project participants.  So
long as these opportunities do not start to create monopolizable
advantages, they can be effective ways to promote sustainability for
some DPG efforts.  A review of an open source project's governance
documents, if available, can give you some additional sense of how
well commercial engagement is steered towards the collective good.

The Mifos initiative knew they not only had to engage existing banking
institutions to drive product adoption, but they also had to create
opportunities for new, innovative, local companies that could deliver
the 'last mile' for financial inclusion.  A centralized, proprietary
model could never support the innovation and scale needed to make
their product useful and trusted across so many locales and domains.
Open source made it easy for
[*anyone*](https://mifos.org/impact/powered-by-mifos/) to deliver a
new financial service product simply by developing a new extension,
creating a new application or packaged solution on top of the Mifos
infrastructure, or by integrating Mifos with their own product.  Mifos
also invested early in developing [local IT
partnerships](https://mifos.org/mifos-initiative/partner-led-ecosystem-2/)
to help with implementating, hosting, and supporting Mifos X.
Moreover, they turned users into active agents for innovation and
adoption by establishing [community
chapters](https://mifos.org/resources/community/mifos-chapters/).
These local volunteer organizations help communities use and shape
Mifos to their particular needs, and they provide feedback to the main
project (see the Appendix(TBD LINK) for how Mozilla supports a much
less centralized volunteer community around the Common Voice open data
project).

**KEY RECOMMENDATION**: Encouraging commercial participation can be
useful to a DPG's adoption and sustainability, but take care to foster
diverse commercial actors and be wary of creating commerical
opportunities that could permit unfair advantage.

## Community Lifecycle, Longevity, and Sustainability

All DPGs have a lifecycle.  That lifecycle may not be knowable in
advance, but it will eventually become apparent.  As a project
matures, its rate of user acquisition slows down, the rate at which
new contributors come in likewise slows down, and, in the long run,
the rate of new feature development slows as well.

Projects that have an extensible design (see Extensibility section in
the [Adoptability](TBD LINK) module) often have a longer lifecycle,
though this may be correlation rather than causation: longer-lived
projects tend to become extensible, and innovation can continue to
happen in the plugin ecosystem even after the software's core has
remained stable for a long time.  But, perhaps with rare exceptions,
most software projects that last long enough eventually reach a stable
state: either they address their problem domain so well that no
further improvement is needed, or they are overtaken by some newer,
nimbler competitor that was able to learn from its predecessors'
mistakes and that does not suffer from the burdens of having an old
code base that has accumulated [technical
debt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_debt).

An organization adopting a DPG should try to ascertain, to the extent
possible, where in its lifecycle that DPG is.  It is not necessarily a
problem to adopt a DPG that is in the later, more static part of its
lifecycle.  Maturity has advantages: all the easily encountered bugs
have already been fixed, and the tool's features reflect, at least to
some degree, the accumulated wisdom of many users' real world usage.
But one should not expect the project's community to be eager to add
new features or have design discussions about complicated changes.  At
this point, the project may value stability relatively highly.  If the
DPG needs further work to be useful for a certain purpose, then that
work may have to happen outside the current project community. 

In this instance, some community members might decide to make what's
known as a 'hard fork' (or 'social fork') of the project.  This
entails copying the source code and creating a separate open source
project that's able to develop in a new direction -- an action that's
entirely impossible under a non-open source code license.  A well
known example of a hard fork would be the creation of LibreOffice from
the OpenOffice code base, which was a mass market type open source
project sponsored by Sun Microsystems.  When Oracle acquired Sun
Microsystems in 2010, it was clear to OpenOffice participants that
OpenOffice's competitive alternative to Microsoft Office wasn't
important to Oracle's business and would thus likely run into
problems, so they created a successful hard fork of OpenOffice and
launched a new open source product and community around it called
[LibreOffice](https://www.libreoffice.org/).  Another hard fork is the
Mifos X platform described above, although that decision was based on
sound business strategy and planning.

However, hard forks aren't always successful.  They can be costly in
terms of user confusion, potential legal wrangling over trademarks,
and in-house and community resources, and they can harm community
goodwill too.  Forking a project to meet your needs should always be a
[last resort](https://producingoss.com/en/forks.html).  However,
agencies should be aware that this is an option for open source
projects that are at a stage of maturity in which the community has
made it clear that stability is more important than new features.  In
these instances, if there is no other alternative project that suits
an agency's needs, it might be reasonable to consider a hard fork, and
you might find the project's community supportive of your new
direction.

**RECOMMENDATION**: A 'hard fork' of a project to meet your needs
should always be a last resort. Such an action might be appropriate
for a mature open source product in which there is community
understanding of and support for your new direction, but this is a
costly and fraught thing to do and would require thorough planning and
much foresight.

(TBD: I left this here as FYI for OTS/UNICEF, there was an earlier
discussion point re: including point about forks (TBD: Victor
[agrees](https://github.com/unicef/publicgoods-toolkit/pull/12#discussion_r651332349)
Believe this is taken care of.)

It's notable that content DPGs and software DPGs have different lifecycle
dynamics.  Software lends itself toward endless improvement.  There's
always a feature to add, a new library to adopt, or a new platform to
move to.  Some content sees high rates of reuse and longterm
evolution, but a lot of content settles in to a final version and
thereafter sees somewhat limited reuse.  A Creative Commons-licensed
novel, for example, might initially see revisions, a new edition, minor
fixes to typos, but eventually the book is done.  Somebody might make
a translation or undertake a second edition, but the original work is
readily identifiable as a "finished" artifact.

For software DPGs, it is also not necessarily a mistake to adopt a DPG
that is still in its early stages, when it is not completely stable
and some of its basic feature set may even be in flux.  But in that
case, one must be ready to make the investment -- either directly from
one's organization or through a consultant or vendor -- necessary to
have one's needs met within a certain period of time.  This can be a
"virtuous circle" in some cases: other entities, on seeing a clear
signal of investment, become more willing themselves to invest.

More specific recommendations around lifecycle and maturity in
assessing a project's adoptability are covered in the Adoptability
module. (TBD LINK)
 
A final note on sustainability.  As noted, health -- and thus
sustainability -- depends on whether a project is genuinely meeting
the needs of its stakeholders, if it's thoughtfully set up to be
responsive to changing needs, and if a well diversified set of
stakeholders is engaged and contributing.  In many project types,
stakeholders should probably include a varied set of commercial
actors.
 
There's also a related question of how DPGs can attract ongoing
financial investments, what novel options are out there, and how these
might be applied to the underresourced area of maintenance.
 
Again, creating opportunities for private companies to commercially
benefit is one option.  The GFDDR used the power of modular
contracting (see Procurement (TBD LINK)) to bring in multiple vendors
to develop GeoNode.  As adoption of GeoNode grew, many of these
companies found new clients for their GeoNode expertise, which gave
them additional incentive to continue contributing to GeoNode and
invest in its success (and this infusion of input from an expanded
user base made the product better).  George Gelaga-King, a Software
Engineer from Sierra Leone's Directorate of Science and Technology &
Innovation, confirmed the value of thinking about how to attract
private actors by creating economic opportunities.  Depending on local
circumstances and regulation, agencies themselves might even be able
to offer commercial services around a DPG.
 
(TODO: Can we ask George for a more specific quote about this?  The
interview notes didn't provide anything exact.  If there's a recording
we can pull it from there, or we can suggest something based on notes
and make sure he's ok with it?  Or we can just pull the above.)
 
However, fostering commercial engagement doesn't exclude other
options. GeoNode also worked with universities and other NGOs and
intergovernmental organizations. It's notable how the engagement of
just one PhD student helped distribute GeoNode knowledge and expertise
as he moved jobs between different agencies and organizations.
 
Kari Moe Jacobsen, a senior advisor at the Norwegian Agency for
Development Cooperation (NORAD), believes long-term collaborations
between government ministries and academic institutions are a possible
answer to broad DPG sustainability.  She envisions DPGs being developed
and maintained by universities -- sources of local talent that can
also spin out new businesses -- with their implementation driven by
government agencies, which have a "ground game" understanding of their
populations and experience working with NGO partners to expand their
reach.  This is the
[model](https://digitalpublicgoods.net/blog/the-transformative-role-of-academia-digital-public-goods/)
followed by [District Health Information Software 2
(DHIS2)](https://dhis2.org/), a DPG that aggregates and layers
sector-specific health data.  Here, research grants were thoughtfully
linked to building the DPG.  This model seems particularly promising
when considering the problem of DPG discoverability and re-use by
others -- instead of more "wheel inventing" -- as academic
institutions and governments already have collaborative networks and
relationships that can be leveraged together.  Philanthropic grant
programs fit well here too.
 
Collaborative financing is also an option, as NORAD helped bring to
the [Modular Open Source Identity Platform
(MOSIP)](https://www.mosip.io/index.php).  A university team did
directly support MOSIP, but the collaboration was limited, so outside
funding from the [World Bank's Identification for Development
(ID4D)](https://id4d.worldbank.org) rounded out the financial needs.
Collaborative financing can be managed through intergovernmental
organizations, like the World Bank, or through an NGO, like the
[PATH](https://www.path.org/).  PATH created the [Digital
Square](https://digitalsquare.org) effort to coordinate investments
from over 40 wide-ranging donor types -- including government
agencies, intergovernmental organizations, universities, private
foundations, and private companies -- to improve how the global
community designs, uses, and pays for digital health tools and
approaches.
 
(TBD: from Karl: I'm not sure that all these named quotes are what we
want.  Will check with UNICEF about this.)

(TBD: response from Susy: Totally understood.  There's not a lot of
good case study examples to support some of our points, so I turned to
quotes from the interviews where I thought they could bring in the
experiential insight.)

George Gelaga-King spoke of how pooling financial and personnel
resources across agencies to create a DPG is also an option, although
it can take a lot of upfront investment to identify internal partners
who share your problem and are willing to collaborate to solve
it.  Each agency might hold tight to a set of features it believes are
paramount and not see the value of collaborating to get to an 80%
solution that they can then refine.  However, solving shared problems
while permitting flexibility for differentiation is core to the open
source approach, as well as to modular architectures and extensibility
(see Procurement and Adoptability (TBD LINK)).  Still, the complexity
posed by internal agency collaboration is precisely why centralized
digital services agencies are often at the forefront of government
digital transformation.
 
[Social impact
bonds](https://www.oecd.org/cfe/leed/SIBs-State-Play-Lessons-Final.pdf) (also
known as development impact bonds) are another method of bringing
private capital to the creation and maintenance of public goods. By
definition, they seem like they would help bring more funding to the
long-term maintenance needs of DPGs. They've received a lot of
attention and some uptake, but to our knowledge, this model hasn't
been used by a DPG.
 
Social impact investment funds take varied shapes and can function
like venture capital (like the [UNICEF Venture
Fund](https://www.unicef.org/innovation/venturefund)), private equity,
or a community development financial institution. These can be a great
resource for helping to develop local commercial suppliers and talent.
 
A tax or a precentage of revenue from the sale of public assets, such
as from bandwidth allocation, could fund DPGs. This revenue could be
distributed with a focus on maintenance of successful DPGs. A tax on
private development projects is a similar option, like the ["percent
for art"
programs](https://en.unesco.org/creativity/policy-monitoring-platform/percent-art-scheme)
that require private developers to allocate a certain percentage of
the project's budget to creating and maintaining public art. For some
countries, creating a new tax on a company's IPO value could ensure
capital gains help to pay for existing (and future) public
infrastructure that created the conditions for the company's
existence.
 
Direct crowdfunding and sponsorship might also be a viable financing
option in some cases.  GitHub recently launched [GitHub
Sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors) to let individuals and
companies donate directly to GitHub hosted open source projects.  And
there are surely other options we haven't come across or considered
here.

Lastly, charging for use might be an option as well.  For example, the
DPG [ODK](https://getodk.org/) is free as a self-hosted solution for
offline data collection, but the organization also provides
[cloud-based hosting at different pricing
tiers](https://getodk.org/#odk-cloud).  Infrastructural components of
some DPGs might lend themselves to a revenue-generating model for
commercial implementations to support free non-commercial
implementations.  The DPG [Project AEDES](https://aedesproject.org/),
a portal that predicts dengue hotspots from climate, search and
satellite data, plans to [create a social enterprise around the dengue
prediction
service](https://digitalpublicgoods.net/registry/project-aedes.html).
The predication can be generalized by incorporating other risk
frameworks.  The new social enterprise would offer subscriptions to
the insights.

The most important take-away is to think about your DPG's financial
sustainability from a project lifecycle viewpoint.  Early design and
feasibility work might be funded through research grants to a partner
academic institute.  Seed funding might be at a low enough threshold
for your agency to cover, as it was for the World Bank's Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDDR) with the GeoNode
project, or you
might complement your investment in an external vendor with funding
from a social impact investor.  Philanthropic funds might help you
pilot the project in particular locations, as was the case with the
DHIS2, or for scaling, as was the case with
[OpenSRP](https://wiki.digitalsquare.io/index.php/Digital_Square_Investments_in_Global_Goods#Notice_B_Investments),
or for capacity, as was the case with the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation [funding a community manager for the DPG
Mojaloop](https://appdevelopermagazine.com/the-gates-foundation-chats-about-mojaloop).
The DPG [Primero](https://www.primero.org/resources) is a
collaborative effort across aid organizations and agencies that
started with initial seed funding of $1.5 million from the United
States Agency for International Development's (USAID) Office of
Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) and the United States Center for
Disease Control (CDC).  [Ongoing platform development costs are funded
by UNICEF, while countries fund the costs for customizing the platform
to their specific
requirements](https://www.unicef.org/evaluation/media/946/file/Primero.pdf).
Training and ongoing maintenance costs might be linked with existing
investments or new grants to local academic institutions to improve
digital skills and build the local workforce.

 
**KEY RECOMMENDATION**: Consider how you might approach financial
sustainability differently across your DPG's project
stages. Monolithic funding isn't necessarily the answer. The types and
sources of available funding options might change as a project
progresses. This is true for projects with relatively low funding
needs as well.
